Building a polymorphic health data management systemClaude finished the responseYou said: I am building an open source, highly polymorphic, health data management system to guide and facilitate patient care, management, and later, research, with a f…I am building an open source, highly polymorphic, health data management system to guide and facilitate patient care, management, and later, research, with a focus on serving even sub-minimal infrastructure areas (single clinicians, single doctors who want to streamline their management even on a legacy team, rural hospitals, small clinics, all the way to multi-team multi-department hospitals). This project must be capable of delivery and deployment at all levels, able to provide and transmit the relevant information frictionlessly (essentially, it needs to be able to beat calling someone else and asking them for the information in ease of use). It must provide comparable functionality even when deployed as an offline app on a single doctor's phone, with local encryption and storage, or when deployed at a small hospital, where it operates as a mesh network with each provider being a distributed node, or when at a large centre where it is configured to keep different teams siloed, different configurations for different departments on the same network, and the capacity to share or transfer patients and patient records securely between teams and departments. Also the presence of local models to extract data from things like photos of handwritten records, pdf files, voice messages, and in-app dictations. It must be highly extensible, reliable, with regulatory compliance level security.This project is called New Loka. I'm working on the systems architecture and system design. How do I make this happen? Give comprehensive checklists of requirements, and options to fulfil those that can be reliably implemented in all the locations that they're in.Show more10:39 AMClaude responded: New Loka: Systems Architecture & DesignNew Loka: Systems Architecture & Design
This is a genuinely ambitious project — essentially a distributed health record system that must function coherently across a five-order-of-magnitude range of deployment contexts. Let me give you a structured architecture map and comprehensive checklists.

Mental Model First
Think of New Loka as three nested systems:

The Core — a portable, encrypted health data kernel that runs anywhere
The Mesh Layer — sync, conflict resolution, and trust protocols that activate when peers are present
The Services Layer — local AI, compliance, team/department management, and research modules that scale with available resources

Every deployment is the same codebase. What changes is which modules activate based on discovered environment.

I. Deployment Tier Definitions
Before requirements, define your tiers clearly — every architectural decision forks on this:
TierContextConnectivityStorageAuth ModelT0Single clinician, phone-onlyOffline / occasional syncLocal device onlySingle user, PIN/biometricT1Small clinic, 2–10 providersLAN only, no internetLocal server or peer meshRole-based, local adminT2Rural hospitalIntermittent internetLocal server + async cloud syncRBAC, department-awareT3Multi-department hospitalReliable internetHybrid: local + cloudFull RBAC, silo enforcement, federationT4Research / federated networkFull internetFederated, privacy-preservingInstitutional trust chains

II. Core Architecture Requirements
A. Data Layer
Storage Engine

 Embed a local-first database engine — CRDTs (Conflict-free Replicated Data Types) for all patient records, so offline edits always merge deterministically
 Candidate: CR-SQLite (SQLite with CRDT extensions) — runs on phone, server, browser
 All data encrypted at rest: AES-256-GCM with per-record keys
 Key management: device-local keystore (Android Keystore / iOS Secure Enclave) at T0; a local KMS (e.g., HashiCorp Vault in dev mode) at T1+
 FHIR R4 as canonical data model — every record is a FHIR resource internally, so interoperability is structural, not bolted on
 Immutable audit log (append-only, cryptographically chained — think a local blockchain-like ledger) for every record access, edit, and transmission event

Schema Design

 Patient identity as a deterministic UUID derived from demographic anchors (DOB + facility-assigned ID) — solves duplicate patient risk across offline nodes
 Every resource carries: created_by, created_at, modified_by, modified_at, origin_node_id, sync_vector_clock
 Soft deletes only — regulatory compliance requires record retention


B. Sync & Mesh Layer
This is the hardest part architecturally.
Peer Discovery

 mDNS / Bonjour for LAN peer discovery (zero-config, works on any LAN)
 Bluetooth Low Energy beaconing for sub-LAN scenarios (two phones in a clinic with no router)
 WiFi Direct as fallback for peer-to-peer data transfer
 Each node has a persistent node identity (Ed25519 keypair, generated at install) — this is how the mesh knows who is who regardless of IP

Sync Protocol

 Build on Automerge or Yjs (mature CRDT sync libraries) rather than rolling your own
 Sync is pull-based with push notifications — nodes advertise a vector clock; peers pull only the delta
 Conflict resolution rules must be domain-specific, not just "last write wins":

Medication records: flag conflict for human review, never auto-resolve
Administrative fields: last-write-wins acceptable
Vitals timeseries: merge by timestamp, duplicates deduplicated by hash


 Sync sessions are encrypted with ephemeral session keys (X25519 key exchange per session)
 Bandwidth-aware sync: detect available bandwidth, prioritize critical records (active admissions, current medications) over historical records

Conflict & Consistency

 Define per-resource-type consistency requirements (eventual vs. strong)
 Patient identity merging (two offline nodes created the same patient): fuzzy match on demographics, flag for admin review with a merge UI
 Sync state machine: local_only → pending_sync → synced → conflict → resolved


C. Security & Compliance
Authentication & Authorization

 Offline-capable auth: credentials stored as salted Argon2id hashes locally — no server dependency to log in
 TOTP 2FA optional at T0, required at T2+, with offline TOTP (RFC 6238 — works without internet)
 Role model: Patient, Clinician, Nurse, Admin, Researcher, Super-Admin
 Attribute-Based Access Control (ABAC) rather than simple RBAC — allows rules like "Clinician can access records of patients assigned to their team within their department in the last 30 days"
 Department silos enforced at the data layer, not just the UI — a query from a cardiology user physically cannot return oncology-siloed records

Transport Security

 All sync over TLS 1.3 minimum when on internet; DTLS for local mesh
 Certificate pinning for known institutional servers
 mTLS (mutual TLS) between hospital nodes — both sides authenticate

Regulatory Alignment (design for the hardest applicable standard)

 HIPAA (US) — baseline for any deployment serving global research partners
 DISHA / IT Act (India) — relevant for your primary market
 GDPR (EU) — for T4 research federation
 Design to HL7 FHIR R4 compliance from day one
 Audit log must be tamper-evident, exportable, and retained per jurisdiction rules
 Right to access / right to erasure: implement a patient data export (FHIR Bundle) and a "legal hold" flag before any delete


III. AI / Local Intelligence Layer
This is the differentiator — local models that work offline.
Input Processing Pipeline
Handwritten Records (OCR)

 On-device: TrOCR (Microsoft, MIT licensed) — transformer-based, handles messy handwriting well; quantized to run on mobile
 Fallback pipeline: image → preprocessing (deskew, denoise via OpenCV) → OCR → structured extraction
 Output always goes to a human review queue — never auto-committed to patient record
 Language support prioritization: English, Hindi, regional scripts (Devanagari) — use script detection before routing to the right model

PDF Ingestion

 pdfplumber / pypdf for text-layer PDFs
 For scanned PDFs: rasterize pages → same OCR pipeline as above
 Lab report parser: regex + ML hybrid to extract structured values (test name, result, unit, reference range) → map to FHIR Observation resources
 Discharge summary parser: NLP entity extraction → map to FHIR Composition

Voice & Dictation

 On-device STT: Whisper (OpenAI, MIT license) — specifically whisper.cpp for mobile/embedded deployment; tiny or base model for T0, medium for T1+
 In-app dictation: streaming audio → whisper.cpp → live transcript → structured SOAP note extraction
 Voice commands: intent classifier (lightweight, distilBERT-based) for navigation and quick-entry commands
 Speaker diarization at T2+ (multiple speakers in a ward round recording)

Structured Extraction from Unstructured Text

 Local LLM for clinical NLP: Phi-3-mini or Llama 3.2 3B (quantized, GGUF format via llama.cpp)
 Task: extract medications, dosages, diagnoses, allergies, procedures from free text → FHIR resources
 All AI suggestions presented with confidence score; low-confidence items go to review queue
 No patient data ever sent to an external API without explicit consent and institutional approval — this is a hard architectural constraint

Model Management

 Model registry: each deployment declares which models it has locally
 Models distributed as signed packages through the app update system (not patient data channels)
 A/B testing framework for model versions at T3+ (hospital can evaluate new models before deploying)


IV. Application Layer
Cross-Platform Strategy

 Flutter — single codebase for Android, iOS, Linux (for T1 servers running on a repurposed laptop), and Windows; strong offline support; good for resource-constrained devices
 Or: React Native + a Rust core library (via FFI) for the data/crypto/sync engine — Rust gives you memory safety and performance for the critical path
 The data/sync/crypto core should be a platform-agnostic Rust library regardless of UI choice — it can then be wrapped for mobile, desktop, and server

UX Requirements (the "beat a phone call" bar)

 Any piece of information a clinician needs must be reachable in ≤3 taps from the home screen
 Patient lookup: fuzzy search by name, ID, bed number, condition — results in <200ms even on device
 Offline indicator always visible — clinicians must always know whether they are seeing synced or local-only data
 Last synced at [timestamp] on every patient record view
 Critical alerts (drug interaction, abnormal lab) must be surfaced even if the app is backgrounded — local push notifications, no server dependency
 Handoff summary: one-tap generation of a structured handoff note from current record state

Key Screens / Flows

 Patient list (filterable by ward, team, condition, admission date)
 Patient chart (timeline view: admissions, vitals, medications, notes, labs, imaging)
 Quick entry (vitals, single observation, medication administration)
 Dictation mode (tap to record, live transcript, review before commit)
 Document ingestion (camera scan, PDF upload, voice memo)
 Team/handoff management (assign, transfer, acknowledge)
 Admin console (department/silo config, user management, sync status)


V. Infrastructure & Deployment
T0 (Phone, Offline)

 Single APK/IPA, fully self-contained
 All data in device-local CR-SQLite, encrypted with device keystore key
 Optional: sync to a personal cloud (Dropbox, Google Drive) as encrypted blob — no FHIR server needed
 Backup: encrypted export to local file, shareable via QR or file transfer

T1–T2 (Clinic / Rural Hospital)

 A single Raspberry Pi 5 or equivalent can serve as the hub (4GB RAM, runs the sync server, local model server, and admin UI)
 All peers discover the hub via mDNS; hub is just another trusted node, not a master
 If hub goes down, mesh continues peer-to-peer — no single point of failure
 Hub syncs to cloud when internet is available (delta sync, compressed, encrypted)
 Containerized deployment: Docker Compose — single command setup for non-technical admins

T3 (Hospital)

 Kubernetes deployment (or Docker Swarm for simpler ops)
 Department namespacing at the database and network layer
 API Gateway (Kong or Nginx) enforcing department-level access policies before any request reaches the data layer
 Internal FHIR server (HAPI FHIR — open source, Java, battle-tested) as the institutional record server
 On-premise model serving: Ollama or vLLM for the local LLM, GPU if available, CPU fallback
 Integration adapters for existing HIS/EMR systems: HL7 v2 listener, DICOM gateway, and a generic webhook adapter

T4 (Research Federation)

 Federated learning infrastructure: models train on local data, only gradients (never patient data) are shared
 Differential privacy applied to any aggregate query leaving the institution
 SMART on FHIR authorization for third-party research app access
 Patient consent management system: granular consent per data type per research purpose, with revocation


VI. Technology Stack Summary
LayerRecommended ChoiceLicenseWhyUIFlutterBSDSingle codebase, offline-capable, runs on all targetsCore engineRust libraryMIT/ApacheSafety, performance, cross-platform FFILocal DBCR-SQLiteMITCRDT-native, SQLite-compatible, runs everywhereSyncAutomerge-rsMITMature, Rust-native CRDT syncCryptolibsodium / RustCryptoMITAudited, widely usedFHIR server (T3+)HAPI FHIRApache 2.0Industry standardOCRTrOCR (ONNX)MITOn-device handwriting recognitionSTTwhisper.cppMITOn-device, all platformsLLMLlama 3.2 3B / Phi-3-miniLlama license / MITLocal, no data egressModel runtimellama.cpp / ONNX RuntimeMITRuns on CPU, optional GPUContainerDocker + Docker ComposeApache 2.0Simple T1/T2 deploymentOrchestration (T3)KubernetesApache 2.0Industry standardAuthCustom ABAC on top of JWT—Offline-capable, FHIR-aligned

VII. Build Sequence (Phased)
Phase 1 — The Core (T0 working end-to-end)
Data model → local encrypted storage → basic FHIR resources → offline auth → patient CRUD → vitals entry → dictation → basic OCR
Phase 2 — The Mesh (T1 working)
Node identity → mDNS discovery → Automerge sync → conflict resolution → sync UI → Raspberry Pi deployment package
Phase 3 — The Institution (T3 working)
ABAC engine → department silos → HAPI FHIR server → API gateway → LDAP/AD integration → audit log export → existing HIS adapters
Phase 4 — Intelligence
Local LLM integration → structured extraction pipeline → lab report parser → drug interaction checker (using a local copy of OpenFDA data) → federated model training groundwork
Phase 5 — Federation & Research
Federated learning → differential privacy → SMART on FHIR → consent management → research query interface

The key insight holding this together: the Rust core library is the system. Everything else — Flutter UI, HAPI FHIR server, Kubernetes deployment — is a shell around it. That core must be written once, tested exhaustively, and trusted completely. All the polymorphism you need across tiers comes from which modules the deployment activates, not from different codebases.
Want me to go deeper on any specific layer — the CRDT sync design, the ABAC model, the AI pipeline, or the phased build plan?You said: Pretty happy with a CRDT based datasystem, and the bottom up build plan.Pretty happy with a CRDT based datasystem, and the bottom up build plan. The system itself must be platform agnostic. The UI will have to be platform specific though. Do I use rust ui libraries? or are there better options?And also, do I need a separate internal security protocol to handle on device encryption and decryption, which can then be extended across the network to prevent unauthorised access at any level? Will that be part of the ABAC?11:43 AMClaude responded: UI Strategy: Platform-Specific vs.UI Strategy: Platform-Specific vs. Rust UI
Short answer: don't use Rust UI libraries for this. Here's why, and what to do instead.
The Rust UI Landscape Problem
Rust UI frameworks (Tauri, Slint, Iced, Dioxus, Egui) are genuinely good for desktop apps but have critical gaps for your context:
FrameworkMobileOffline-firstAccessibilityMaturityVerdictTauriPartial/experimentalGoodWeb-dependentGrowingNot yetSlintiOS/Android betaGoodLimitedYoungToo earlyIcedDesktop onlyGoodLimitedGrowingNoEguiDesktop/webGoodPoorModerateNoDioxusPartialModerateWeb-dependentVery youngNo
None of them reliably handle the T0 use case — a clinician in a rural clinic on a 3-year-old Android phone — which is your hardest constraint.
The Right Architecture
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                  PLATFORM UI LAYER                  │
│  Flutter (mobile/desktop) │ React (web/T3 admin)   │
└────────────────┬────────────────────────────────────┘
                 │  FFI / Platform Channels
┌────────────────▼────────────────────────────────────┐
│              RUST CORE LIBRARY                      │
│  (uniffi-rs bindings → Kotlin, Swift, Dart, WASM)  │
│                                                     │
│  • CRDT engine      • Crypto/key management         │
│  • Sync protocol    • ABAC enforcement              │
│  • FHIR resources   • AI model runner               │
│  • Audit log        • Conflict resolution           │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
mozilla/uniffi-rs is the binding layer you want. It lets you write the core once in Rust and auto-generates idiomatic bindings for:

Kotlin (Android)
Swift (iOS)
Python (tooling/testing)
WASM (browser, T3 web admin)

Flutter talks to the Rust core via flutter_rust_bridge — a well-maintained package that wraps uniffi-style bindings cleanly for Dart. This is the exact architecture used by several serious offline-first mobile apps today.
UI Per Platform
TargetUI FrameworkWhyAndroid / iOS (T0–T2)FlutterSingle codebase, excellent offline, Material/Cupertino adaptiveLinux desktop (T1 server admin)Flutter desktopSame codebase extends cleanlyWindows (T2 clinic workstation)Flutter desktopSameWeb (T3 hospital admin console)React + Rust/WASM coreWASM runs the same Rust core in browserRaspberry Pi kiosk (T1 hub)Flutter LinuxRuns well on Pi 5
One Flutter codebase, one React codebase for the web admin. Both talk to the same Rust core through their respective bridges. You are not maintaining separate logic — only separate presentation.

Security Architecture: Yes, You Need a Dedicated Protocol Layer
This is the most important architectural decision after the CRDT choice. The answer is: ABAC and encryption are related but separate concerns, and conflating them will hurt you.
Think of it as three distinct systems that compose:
┌──────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│           WHAT YOU'RE ALLOWED TO DO              │  ← ABAC (Policy Engine)
├──────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│           WHETHER YOU ARE WHO YOU SAY            │  ← Identity & Auth
├──────────────────────────────────────────────────┤
│           WHETHER THE DATA IS PROTECTED          │  ← Cryptographic Layer
└──────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
Layer 1: The Cryptographic Layer (Innermost, Always On)
This lives entirely in the Rust core. It is not access control — it is the physical protection of data regardless of who is asking.
Key Hierarchy:
Device Master Key (DMK)
│  derived from: hardware keystore + user passphrase (Argon2id)
│  never leaves the device
│
├── Patient Record Key (PRK) — one per patient
│   encrypted with DMK, stored alongside record
│   decrypted only when a session is active
│
├── Sync Session Key (SSK) — ephemeral, per sync session
│   X25519 key exchange between two node identities
│   forward secrecy: past sessions can't be decrypted even if
│   node key is later compromised
│
└── Audit Log Key (ALK) — append-only signing key
    signs each audit entry (Ed25519)
    cannot be used to decrypt anything
Construction:

Use libsodium (via the Rust sodiumoxide or dryoc crates) — it is the most widely audited cryptographic library available, with a high-level API that prevents misuse
Never implement your own primitives. Libsodium's crypto_secretstream for streaming encryption, crypto_box for sealed records, crypto_sign for audit entries
PRKs are what make the system truly zero-knowledge at the storage level — even if someone extracts the SQLite file from the device, individual records are encrypted with separate keys

On-Device Key Storage:

Android: Android Keystore System (hardware-backed on most devices made after 2017)
iOS: Secure Enclave (hardware-backed)
Linux/Pi: TPM 2.0 if available; fallback to a key file protected by OS permissions + passphrase

Layer 2: Identity & Authentication
This establishes who the session belongs to before any access decision is made.
Node Identity (permanent):
Every installed instance of New Loka generates an Ed25519 keypair at first run. This is the node's identity on the mesh. It is:

Stored in the hardware keystore
Used to sign all data originating from this node
The basis for trust establishment when joining a clinic/hospital network

User Identity (session):

Credentials: username + passphrase, hashed with Argon2id, stored locally
On login: derive a session token (HMAC-SHA256 of user identity + timestamp + node identity)
Session token is short-lived (configurable: 4h default, 15min for high-security deployments)
Offline TOTP (RFC 6238) for 2FA — works without any server

Trust Establishment Between Nodes (the hard problem):
When a new node wants to join a clinic mesh, you need a trust ceremony:
New Node                          Admin Node
    │                                  │
    │── broadcasts node_id + pub_key ──│
    │                                  │  Admin reviews, approves in UI
    │←─ signed trust certificate ──────│
    │                                  │
    │  (stores cert, now trusted by    │
    │   all nodes that trust Admin)    │
This is essentially a lightweight PKI — the first admin at a deployment is the root of trust, and they sign trust certificates for new nodes. At T3, this integrates with the institution's existing certificate authority.
Layer 3: ABAC Policy Engine
This sits above the crypto and identity layers. It answers: given a verified identity and a decrypted resource, is this action permitted?
Policy Structure:
Policy := Subject × Resource × Action × Context → Permit | Deny | Not_Applicable

Subject:    { user_id, roles[], department_id, node_id }
Resource:   { patient_id, record_type, owning_department, sensitivity_level }
Action:     { read | write | delete | export | share | print }
Context:    { time_of_day, is_emergency_override, patient_assigned_to_subject,
              days_since_last_encounter, sync_state }
Key policies to implement:
PERMIT  Clinician READ Patient.record
        WHERE Patient.assigned_team CONTAINS Clinician.team_id
        AND record.department_id = Clinician.department_id

PERMIT  Clinician READ Patient.record
        WHERE Context.is_emergency_override = true
        AND Action logged with override_reason (audit required)

DENY    ANY READ Patient.record
        WHERE record.department_id ≠ Subject.department_id
        AND Subject.role ≠ {Admin, Super-Admin}
        AND Context.is_emergency_override = false

PERMIT  Nurse WRITE Patient.vitals
        WHERE Patient.assigned_ward = Nurse.assigned_ward

DENY    Nurse DELETE ANY

PERMIT  Admin READ audit_log
        WHERE audit_log.department_id = Admin.department_id
Emergency Override ("Break Glass"):
This is a regulatory requirement — a clinician must always be able to access a record in an emergency, even across department silos. Implement it as:

Explicit UI action: "Access Emergency Record" with mandatory reason entry
Immediately logged to immutable audit trail
Generates an alert to the owning department's admin
Time-limited access (e.g., 2 hours)

How ABAC Relates to Crypto:
Request arrives
      │
      ▼
Identity verified? (Layer 2)
      │ No → Reject (never touch encrypted data)
      │ Yes
      ▼
ABAC policy check (Layer 3)
      │ Deny → Reject (never touch encrypted data)
      │ Permit
      ▼
Decrypt PRK with DMK (Layer 1)
      │
      ▼
Decrypt record, serve to session
      │
      ▼
Re-encrypt before write, log to audit trail
The critical property: the cryptographic layer cannot be bypassed by policy misconfiguration. Even if an ABAC rule is wrong, the encrypted record is useless without the PRK, and the PRK is only unwrapped inside a verified session. ABAC and crypto are defense in depth — each is a complete barrier independently.
How This Extends Across the Network
When data moves between nodes (sync), the same stack applies but in transport mode:
Sending Node                          Receiving Node
      │                                     │
      │  1. ABAC: am I permitted to          │
      │     share this record to that node? │
      │  2. Establish SSK via X25519        │
      │  3. Re-encrypt record envelope      │
      │     with SSK (not PRK)              │
      │─── encrypted sync payload ─────────→│
      │                                     │  4. Verify sender node cert
      │                                     │  5. Decrypt with SSK
      │                                     │  6. ABAC: am I permitted to
      │                                     │     receive and store this?
      │                                     │  7. Re-encrypt with local PRK
      │                                     │  8. Store, log receipt
The record is never in plaintext in transit, and the receiving node's ABAC independently validates the transfer — so a compromised sending node cannot force unauthorized records onto a receiving node.

Summary of What You're Building
ComponentTechnologyLocationCrypto primitiveslibsodium via Rust (dryoc)Rust coreKey hierarchyCustom, hardware-anchoredRust coreNode PKI / trustEd25519 certificates, custom ceremonyRust coreABAC engineCustom policy engine, Cedar policy language worth evaluatingRust coreSession authArgon2id + TOTP + short-lived tokensRust coreUI (mobile)Flutter + flutter_rust_bridgePlatform layerUI (web admin)React + Rust/WASMPlatform layerBindingsuniffi-rsBridge layer
One more thing worth flagging: AWS Cedar (open sourced in 2023) is a formally verified policy language designed exactly for ABAC at scale, with a Rust SDK. It may save you significant effort over building the policy engine from scratch, and formal verification is something you'll want when demonstrating regulatory compliance.
Want to go deeper on the trust ceremony design, the CRDT-ABAC interaction (how policies apply to in-flight unsynced records), or the Flutter-Rust bridge implementation pattern?You said: Consider this scenario;Consider this scenario; I am a clinician sitting in casualty. I want to admit a patient urgently for an appendicectomy. My co-resident is in the operating theatre, waiting for any case that might come. Give me the full data pipeline of every single interaction with New Loka at the level of the hospital record, admitting physician, urgent labs, OT transfer, post-op, and finally discharge. Also, pick any one transit of data (eg, call to anaesthesia for emergency surgery, then their anaesthesia notes, which are then viewed by the head of surgery), and possible error remediation in another instance (in a hurry, the surgeon accidentally records 1mg cefazolin instead of 1g, how is that flagged, both immediately on heuristics, and if entered into the record, later on while recording to the audit trail)11:58 AMClaude responded: New Loka: Full Clinical Data Pipeline — Emergency AppendicectomyNew Loka: Full Clinical Data Pipeline — Emergency Appendicectomy

The Cast & Their Node Identities
PersonRoleNodeDepartmentDr. Priya (you)Casualty ResidentiPhone T0 nodeEmergencyDr. ArjunCo-resident / SurgeoniPhone T0 nodeSurgeryDr. MeeraAnaesthesiologistiPad T0 nodeAnaesthesiaSr. KavithaScrub NurseShared ward tabletSurgery/OTDr. RaoHead of SurgeryDesktop workstationSurgeryLab SystemAutomated analyserT1 nodePathologyOT SystemAnaesthesia workstationT1 nodeOT

Act I: Casualty — Patient Presentation & Registration
1.1 Patient Creation (T=0:00)
Dr. Priya opens New Loka. The app loads entirely from local state — no network call needed to open.
She taps New Patient → Emergency Admission.
UI Action: TextInput → PatientIdentityForm
Fields: Name, DOB, Sex, Presenting complaint, Triage priority

Rust Core (on Submit):
  1. Hash demographics → deterministic UUID candidate
     UUID = BLAKE3(name_normalized + DOB_ISO + sex)
     → "pat-7f3a9c..."
  
  2. Query local CRDT store:
     "Does pat-7f3a9c already exist?"
     → No match. New record.
  
  3. Construct FHIR Patient resource:
     {
       resourceType: "Patient",
       id: "pat-7f3a9c",
       name: [{family: "Sharma", given: ["Ravi"]}],
       birthDate: "1991-03-14",
       gender: "male",
       meta: {
         node_origin: "priya-iphone-node-ed25519-pub",
         vector_clock: {priya: 1},
         created_at: "2026-05-25T09:00:00Z",
         department_id: "dept-emergency"
       }
     }
  
  4. Encrypt with Patient Record Key:
     PRK = generate_random_key_256()
     PRK stored encrypted under Priya's DMK
     Patient resource → AES-256-GCM(PRK) → local CR-SQLite
  
  5. Append to audit log:
     { event: "PATIENT_CREATED", actor: "priya", 
       patient: "pat-7f3a9c", node: "priya-iphone",
       timestamp: T+0:00, signature: Ed25519(ALK, entry) }
1.2 Clinical Assessment — History & Examination
Priya switches to Dictation Mode.
Audio Input Pipeline:
  Mic → PCM buffer (16kHz, mono)
  → whisper.cpp (base.en model, on-device)
  → Raw transcript:
    "Patient is a 34-year-old male presenting with 
     18 hours of right iliac fossa pain, initially 
     periumbilical, migrating. Nausea, no vomiting. 
     Low-grade fever 37.9. Rovsing positive. 
     Rebound tenderness present RIF."

Local LLM Pipeline (Phi-3-mini, on-device):
  Input: raw transcript + system prompt:
    "Extract FHIR R4 resources. Return JSON only."
  
  Output structured as:
  → FHIR Condition:
      { code: SNOMED "74400008" (Appendicitis),
        clinicalStatus: "active",
        verificationStatus: "provisional",
        onsetDateTime: "~18 hours prior",
        evidence: ["RIF pain", "Rovsing+", "rebound tenderness"] }
  
  → FHIR Observation (Vitals):
      { code: LOINC "8310-5" (Body temperature),
        valueQuantity: { value: 37.9, unit: "°C" } }

Confidence scores appended to each resource.
Condition confidence: 0.91 → auto-staged for review.
Review Queue appears in UI. Priya taps through, confirms or edits each extracted item. On confirm:
Each confirmed resource:
  → Encrypted with PRK → stored in CR-SQLite
  → Vector clock incremented: {priya: 2}
  → Audit entry signed and appended
1.3 Ordering Emergency Labs
Priya taps Order Labs → Emergency Panel → Appendicitis Protocol.
This pre-populates: CBC, CRP, LFT, Urea/Creatinine, Coagulation screen, Blood group & crossmatch, Urine routine.
FHIR ServiceRequest bundle constructed:
  {
    resourceType: "ServiceRequest",
    id: "sr-labs-001",
    status: "active",
    priority: "stat",
    subject: { reference: "Patient/pat-7f3a9c" },
    requester: { reference: "Practitioner/priya" },
    code: [{ coding: LOINC codes for each test }],
    authoredOn: T+0:08
  }

Sync trigger:
  mDNS discovery → Lab System node visible on hospital LAN
  Ephemeral SSK established (X25519)
  ServiceRequest bundle → AES-GCM(SSK) → Lab node
  
Lab node:
  Verifies Priya's node certificate (trusted by hospital CA)
  ABAC check: "Can Emergency Resident order STAT labs?" → PERMIT
  Decrypts, stores ServiceRequest
  Acknowledges: { status: "received", eta_minutes: 25 }
  
  Priya's UI: "Labs dispatched. ETA ~25 min"
  Audit: LAB_ORDER_SENT, LAB_ORDER_RECEIVED (both nodes log)

Act II: Surgical Coordination — The OT Call
2.1 Priya Contacts Dr. Arjun
Priya taps Transfer / Consult → Surgical Consult → Urgent.
New Loka constructs a FHIR ServiceRequest (consult type):
  {
    resourceType: "ServiceRequest",
    intent: "proposal",
    priority: "urgent",
    category: "surgical-consult",
    subject: "Patient/pat-7f3a9c",
    performer: [{ reference: "Practitioner/arjun" }],
    note: "Provisional appendicitis. RIF pain 18h, 
           Rovsing+, rebound+. Fever 37.9. 
           Consider emergency appendicectomy.",
    supportingInfo: ["Condition/appendicitis-001", 
                     "Observation/vitals-001"]
  }

Push notification (local, no internet needed):
  Arjun's device receives encrypted notification via LAN mesh
  Notification payload: patient_id + consult_id + priority_flag
  Actual clinical data NOT in notification payload (security)
  
Arjun opens New Loka:
  ABAC check: 
    "Can Surgery Resident READ Emergency patient record?"
    Context: { consult_request_active: true } → PERMIT (consult scope)
    Access is scoped: Arjun can see clinical summary, not full history
  
  PRK for pat-7f3a9c is re-encrypted under SSK, 
  transmitted to Arjun's node, re-encrypted under Arjun's DMK.
  Arjun now has local access to this patient's record.
  
  Audit: RECORD_ACCESS_GRANTED, reason: CONSULT_REQUEST,
         granting_node: priya-iphone, receiving_node: arjun-iphone
Arjun reviews, agrees. He taps Accept Consult → Book OT → Emergency.
FHIR Encounter created (OT booking):
  {
    resourceType: "Encounter",
    id: "enc-ot-001",
    class: "IMP" (inpatient),
    type: "Emergency Surgery",
    subject: "Patient/pat-7f3a9c",
    participant: [
      { individual: "Practitioner/arjun", type: "primary-surgeon" }
    ],
    serviceProvider: "dept-surgery",
    period: { start: "estimated T+0:45" }
  }

Sync to OT management system node.
OT confirms slot. Sr. Kavitha's tablet gets OT prep notification.
2.2 Anaesthesia Call — The Deep Dive Transit
This is the selected data transit for full forensic detail.
Arjun taps Request Anaesthesia → Emergency → Assign Dr. Meera.
Step 1: Arjun's Node — Preparing the Referral Package
Rust Core assembles FHIR Bundle (referral type):
  Resources included:
    - Patient demographics
    - Condition (provisional appendicitis)
    - Vitals (temp, HR, BP, SpO2)
    - Allergy list (currently: none recorded — flagged as "unconfirmed")
    - Current medications (none recorded)
    - Lab orders (pending — status transmitted)
    - Consult ServiceRequest
    - Encounter (OT booking)
  
  Bundle signed:
    manifest = SHA-256 of each resource ID + content hash
    bundle_signature = Ed25519(arjun_node_privkey, manifest)
    → Any tampering with any resource invalidates signature
  
  Bundle encrypted:
    SSK_arjun_meera = X25519(arjun_ephemeral_priv, meera_node_pub)
    Encrypted payload = crypto_secretstream(SSK, bundle)
    → Forward secrecy: this SSK used only for this session
Step 2: Transit
Transport: hospital LAN (TLS 1.3, certificate pinned to hospital CA)
Packet structure:
  {
    sender_node_id: "arjun-iphone-pubkey-fingerprint",
    receiver_node_id: "meera-ipad-pubkey-fingerprint",
    session_id: "sess-uuid-ephemeral",
    payload: <encrypted_bundle>,
    bundle_hmac: HMAC-SHA256(SSK, payload),  ← integrity check
    timestamp: T+0:18,
    sequence: 1
  }

What is visible to anyone intercepting on the LAN:
  - Sender and receiver node fingerprints (pseudonymous)
  - Timestamp and session ID
  - Encrypted blob (meaningless without SSK)
  - Nothing about the patient
Step 3: Meera's Node — Receipt & Verification
Rust Core on receipt:
  1. Verify HMAC → payload unmodified in transit ✓
  2. Decrypt with SSK_arjun_meera
  3. Verify bundle signature with arjun_node_pubkey ✓
     → This data definitely originated from Arjun's node
  4. ABAC check:
     Subject: { user: meera, role: anaesthesiologist, dept: anaesthesia }
     Resource: { patient: pat-7f3a9c, type: pre-op-referral }
     Action: RECEIVE
     Context: { anaesthesia_request_active: true }
     → PERMIT
  5. Re-encrypt bundle resources with Meera's PRK for pat-7f3a9c
  6. Store in local CR-SQLite
  7. Audit entry:
     { event: "REFERRAL_RECEIVED",
       from_node: arjun-iphone,
       to_node: meera-ipad,
       bundle_hash: SHA-256(bundle),
       patient: pat-7f3a9c,
       timestamp: T+0:18,
       signature: Ed25519(meera_ALK, entry) }
  8. Meera's UI surfaces referral with all clinical context
Step 4: Meera's Pre-op Assessment
Meera examines the patient. She dictates her anaesthesia assessment:
Whisper.cpp transcription:
  "Patient is ASA Class 2. No known drug allergies confirmed 
   with patient. Last meal approximately 6 hours ago — 
   acceptable for emergency. Plan: general anaesthesia, 
   RSI technique given semi-elective emergency. 
   Propofol induction, suxamethonium for intubation, 
   maintenance isoflurane. Anticipated blood loss minimal."

Phi-3-mini extraction:
  → FHIR RiskAssessment: { ASA_class: 2 }
  → FHIR MedicationRequest (planned):
      propofol, suxamethonium, isoflurane
  → FHIR Observation: { last_oral_intake: "6h prior" }
  → FHIR AllergyIntolerance: { status: "confirmed-none" }

Meera reviews queue, confirms all.
Resources encrypted under her PRK, stored locally.
Vector clock: { arjun: 3, meera: 1 }
Step 5: Dr. Rao Reviews Meera's Notes
Dr. Rao, Head of Surgery, is on his workstation. He opens the OT list and selects this case.
ABAC check:
  Subject: { user: rao, role: head-of-surgery, dept: surgery }
  Resource: { patient: pat-7f3a9c, type: anaesthesia-notes }
  Action: READ
  Context: { patient_assigned_to_dept: surgery,
             rao_is_dept_head: true }
  → PERMIT (department head has cross-team read within dept scope)
  
  Note: Rao can READ anaesthesia notes for a surgery patient.
  He cannot WRITE to them. He cannot access 
  Meera's other patients.

PRK transit:
  Meera's node is online (same LAN).
  SSK established.
  PRK for pat-7f3a9c re-encrypted under SSK → Rao's workstation.
  Rao's workstation re-encrypts under his session key.
  
  Rao sees complete anaesthesia assessment in his UI.
  Audit: RECORD_ACCESSED, actor: rao, 
         resource: anaesthesia-notes/pat-7f3a9c,
         access_basis: DEPT_HEAD_READ, timestamp: T+0:31

Act III: Labs Return, OT Prep
3.1 Lab Results Sync
Lab analyser completes CBC at T+0:28.

Lab node constructs FHIR DiagnosticReport:
  {
    resourceType: "DiagnosticReport",
    status: "final",
    basedOn: "ServiceRequest/sr-labs-001",
    result: [
      { code: LOINC "6690-2" (WBC),
        valueQuantity: { value: 14.2, unit: "10^9/L" },
        interpretation: "HIGH",
        referenceRange: { low: 4.0, high: 11.0 } },
      { code: LOINC "718-7" (Hemoglobin),
        valueQuantity: { value: 13.8, unit: "g/dL" },
        interpretation: "NORMAL" }
      ... (all tests)
    ]
  }

Critical value check (Lab node, automated):
  WBC 14.2 → above 11.0 → flag: ABNORMAL (not critical)
  No values in critical range (e.g., K+ 7.0+, Hb <7.0)
  
Sync to: Priya's node, Arjun's node, Meera's node
  (all have active access to pat-7f3a9c)

Each node:
  Receives encrypted DiagnosticReport
  Verifies signature (originated from lab-node, trusted cert)
  ABAC: PERMIT for each recipient's role
  Stores, appended to patient timeline
  UI surfaces result with interpretation flags highlighted
  
Priya's device: push notification "Labs returned — WBC elevated"
Arjun's device: same
Meera's device: result automatically incorporated into 
                pre-op risk view

The Error Scenario: 1mg vs 1g Cefazolin
Setting
Post-induction, Sr. Kavitha is recording antibiotic prophylaxis administration. In the rush, she enters 1mg cefazolin instead of 1g.
Tier 1: Heuristic Flagging — Immediate, On-Device
This happens before the record is committed, at the UI validation layer and in the Rust core:
Input received:
  { drug: "Cefazolin", dose: 1, unit: "mg", route: "IV", 
    context: "surgical prophylaxis" }

Rust Core — Clinical Rules Engine:
  Rule set loaded: drug_dosage_heuristics.json
  (local file, updated with app, no internet needed)
  
  Rule fired:
    drug: "Cefazolin"
    indication_context: "surgical prophylaxis"
    expected_dose_range: { min: 500mg, max: 2000mg, typical: 1000mg }
    entered_dose: 1mg
    
  Heuristic result:
    SEVERITY: HIGH
    FLAG: DOSE_BELOW_MINIMUM_THERAPEUTIC
    message: "Entered dose (1mg) is 1000× below minimum 
              therapeutic dose for surgical prophylaxis (500mg).
              Did you mean 1g (1000mg)?"
    
  Magnitude check (catches unit errors specifically):
    ratio = expected_typical / entered = 1000mg / 1mg = 1000
    ratio > 100 → trigger UNIT_ERROR_SUSPECTED flag
    suggestion: "Check unit — possible mg/g confusion"

UI Response:
  Modal alert (cannot be dismissed by tapping outside):
  ┌─────────────────────────────────────┐
  │  ⚠ DOSE VERIFICATION REQUIRED      │
  │                                     │
  │  Cefazolin 1mg IV                   │
  │  This is 1000× below the expected   │
  │  prophylactic dose.                 │
  │                                     │
  │  Did you mean: 1g (1000mg)?         │
  │                                     │
  │  [Correct to 1g]  [Enter manually]  │
  │  [Override with reason]             │
  └─────────────────────────────────────┘
  
  "Enter manually" requires re-entry from scratch (not just confirm)
  "Override with reason" requires text entry + identity re-auth (PIN)
The ideal path ends here — Kavitha taps "Correct to 1g", the right dose is entered, record committed cleanly.

Tier 2: If Entered Into the Record Anyway
Suppose Kavitha is flustered, the surgeon is asking, and she taps "Override" without reading carefully, entering a reason of "confirmed" and re-auths with her PIN. The record is now committed with Cefazolin 1mg.
Record committed:
  FHIR MedicationAdministration:
    { drug: Cefazolin, dose: 1mg, route: IV, 
      administered_by: kavitha, timestamp: T+1:22,
      override_flag: true, override_reason: "confirmed",
      heuristic_warnings: ["DOSE_BELOW_MINIMUM_THERAPEUTIC",
                           "UNIT_ERROR_SUSPECTED"]  ← permanently attached
    }
  
  Note: heuristic warnings are EMBEDDED IN THE RESOURCE.
  They cannot be stripped. The record knows it was entered
  despite warnings.
  
  Audit entry:
    { event: "MEDICATION_ADMINISTERED",
      actor: kavitha,
      drug: cefazolin, dose: 1mg,
      heuristic_flags_overridden: ["DOSE_BELOW_MINIMUM_THERAPEUTIC"],
      override_auth: kavitha_pin_verified,
      timestamp: T+1:22,
      signature: Ed25519(ALK, entry) }
Audit Trail Detection — Asynchronous Review
The audit trail runs a background reconciliation pass — not real-time, scheduled (every 15 minutes in OT, every hour on wards):
Audit Reconciliation Engine (Rust Core, background thread):

  Pass over recent MedicationAdministration events:
  
  1. Retrieves all events with override_flag: true
     → Finds: Cefazolin 1mg, T+1:22, override by kavitha
  
  2. Cross-references:
     - Were heuristic flags present? YES (DOSE_BELOW_MINIMUM)
     - Was override reason substantive? 
       NLP check on "confirmed" → generic, non-specific → flag
     - Was dose within 10% of any known valid dose?
       1mg vs 500mg (minimum) → NO
     - Has a correction been entered subsequently?
       Search: MedicationAdministration after T+1:22 for Cefazolin 
       for pat-7f3a9c → NO
  
  3. Escalation generated:
     FHIR DetectedIssue resource:
       {
         resourceType: "DetectedIssue",
         status: "final",
         severity: "high",
         code: "DOSE-ERROR-SUSPECTED",
         detail: "Cefazolin 1mg administered (T+1:22) despite 
                  heuristic warning. No correction recorded. 
                  Minimum therapeutic dose: 500mg. 
                  Override reason non-specific ('confirmed').",
         patient: "pat-7f3a9c",
         implicated: ["MedicationAdministration/medadmin-007"],
         author: "audit-reconciliation-engine",
         timestamp: T+1:37
       }
  
  4. Notification routing (ABAC-governed):
     → Arjun (primary surgeon, active session): ALERT pushed
     → Meera (anaesthesiologist, active session): ALERT pushed  
     → Sr. Kavitha: ALERT pushed
     → Charge nurse on shift: ALERT pushed
     → NOT to Dr. Rao yet (not in active session — 
       will surface on his next login as pending review item)
What Arjun Sees
Mid-surgery, Arjun's phone (face-down, silenced) 
vibrates with a high-priority pattern.
After the critical step, he glances:

"⚠ MEDICATION REVIEW — Cefazolin 1mg recorded T+1:22. 
 Possible unit error. Confirm or correct."

He taps → sees DetectedIssue with full context.
He taps "Record Correction":

  FHIR MedicationAdministration (correction):
    { drug: Cefazolin, dose: 1000mg (1g), route: IV,
      administered_by: kavitha,  ← original administrator
      corrected_by: arjun,
      corrects: "MedicationAdministration/medadmin-007",
      correction_reason: "Unit error. 1g administered, 
                          recorded as 1mg in error.",
      timestamp: T+1:44
    }
  
  Original erroneous record: NOT deleted.
    status changed to: "entered-in-error"
    linked to correction record
    remains in audit trail permanently.
  
  Audit entry:
    { event: "MEDICATION_CORRECTION",
      original_record: medadmin-007,
      correction_record: medadmin-008,
      original_actor: kavitha,
      correcting_actor: arjun,
      detected_by: audit-reconciliation-engine,
      time_to_detection: "15 minutes",
      time_to_correction: "22 minutes",
      signature: Ed25519(ALK, entry) }
The audit trail now contains an unbroken, tamper-evident narrative: warning fired → override entered → automated detection → correction by physician → all signed by their respective Ed25519 keys. A regulatory audit can reconstruct every decision, by whom, and how long it took.

Act IV: Post-Op & Discharge
4.1 OT Notes & Handoff
Arjun dictates his operative note post-surgery:
Whisper → LLM extraction → FHIR Procedure:
  {
    resourceType: "Procedure",
    code: SNOMED "80146002" (Appendectomy),
    status: "completed",
    subject: "Patient/pat-7f3a9c",
    performer: [{ actor: Practitioner/arjun }],
    outcome: "Perforated appendix with localised peritonitis",
    complication: ["SNOMED 44946007 - peritonitis"],
    followUp: "IV antibiotics, repeat WBC at 24h",
    note: "Laparoscopic converted to open..."
  }

Handoff package generated (one tap):
  New Loka compiles: Encounter + Procedure + active 
  MedicationRequests + outstanding orders + follow-up notes
  → Structured handoff note, human-readable + FHIR Bundle
  → Transmitted to ward team node (night resident)
  → PRK re-encrypted for ward team's access scope
  → Access: ward team can read, not the OT team's prior notes
4.2 Ward Stay — Automated Monitoring
Each vital entry by ward nurse:
  → FHIR Observation → stored → synced
  
Background rule engine checks each new Observation:
  WBC trend: 14.2 (admission) → 11.8 (24h) → improving
  Temp: 37.9 → 37.2 → 36.8 → improving
  
  If: WBC rising OR temp rising after surgery:
  → FHIR DetectedIssue: "Post-op infection suspected"
  → Alert to ward resident + surgical team
4.3 Discharge
Arjun taps Initiate Discharge.
New Loka generates FHIR Composition (Discharge Summary):
  Auto-populated from entire encounter record:
    - Admission diagnosis → final diagnosis
    - Procedures performed
    - Medications administered (including correction record)
    - Lab trends (admission vs discharge)
    - Discharge medications (FHIR MedicationRequest)
    - Follow-up instructions
    - Referring physician notification

Arjun reviews, edits, signs.
Signature: Ed25519(arjun_node_privkey, discharge_summary_hash)

Patient copy:
  FHIR Bundle → PDF rendered locally → 
  shareable via QR code, encrypted download link,
  or printed if T3 printer node available.

Encounter status → "finished"
Patient record:
  Remains accessible to treating team for 30 days post-discharge
  Then: access requires explicit re-authorization (ABAC policy)
  Data retained per jurisdiction rule (India: 7 years minimum)
  Audit log: permanent.

The Complete Data Lineage
Patient Created (Priya, T+0:00)
    │
    ├── Vitals & History (Priya dictation, T+0:05)
    ├── Lab Orders (Priya → Lab node, T+0:08)
    ├── Surgical Consult (Priya → Arjun, T+0:12)
    │       └── OT Booking (Arjun, T+0:15)
    │               └── Anaesthesia Referral (Arjun → Meera, T+0:18)
    │                       └── Pre-op Assessment (Meera, T+0:25)
    │                               └── Reviewed by Rao (T+0:31)
    ├── Lab Results (Lab node → all active, T+0:28)
    │
    ├── [OT]
    │   ├── Cefazolin 1mg ENTERED (Kavitha, T+1:22) ← error
    │   │       └── Heuristic warning overridden
    │   ├── Audit reconciliation DETECTS (T+1:37)
    │   └── Correction entered (Arjun, T+1:44)
    │
    ├── Operative Note (Arjun dictation, T+2:30)
    ├── OT → Ward Handoff (T+2:45)
    │
    ├── Ward Monitoring (Nurse entries, T+3:00 → T+72:00)
    └── Discharge Summary (Arjun, signed, T+72:00)

Every node. Every event. Signed. Encrypted. Audited.
Nothing lost. Nothing unattributed. Nothing undetected.
Every resource in this chain is a valid FHIR R4 resource. The entire encounter, from the moment Priya tapped "New Patient" to Arjun signing the discharge summary, is exportable as a single FHIR Bundle — readable by any compliant system in the world.You said: Do I also need a separate HL7 certification to deploy it?Do I also need a separate HL7 certification to deploy it? How would FHIR work in the single doctor setup?6:28 PMClaude responded: Good practical questions — and the answers are more nuanced than a simple yes/no.Good practical questions — and the answers are more nuanced than a simple yes/no.

HL7 Certification: Do You Need It?
Short answer: you need it to sell to institutions, not to build or deploy.
What HL7 Certification Actually Is
HL7 International doesn't certify software directly for FHIR. What exists is a layered ecosystem:
BodyWhat They DoMandatory?HL7 InternationalMaintains the FHIR standard itself. No product certification program.N/AONC (US)Certifies Health IT for US federal programs (Medicare/Medicaid reimbursement). Requires FHIR R4 as of 2023.Only if billing US federal programsInfoway (Canada)Similar national certification bodyOnly for Canadian public health programsIHE (Integrating the Healthcare Enterprise)Publishes integration profiles (IHE profiles sit on top of FHIR). Connectathon testing available.Voluntary, but expected by large hospitalsNABH / NHA (India)National Accreditation Board for Hospitals. Abdm (Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission) mandates FHIR R4 for any system connecting to the national health stack.If integrating with ABHA/NHA ecosystem
What This Means for New Loka
Mandatory for your primary market (India):
If any deployment connects to the ABHA (Ayushman Bharat Health Account) national stack — which any serious hospital deployment eventually will — you must comply with NHA's FHIR implementation guide. This is not optional certification so much as a conformance requirement for API access. NHA publishes their own FHIR profiles (constraints on top of base FHIR R4).
Practically mandatory for T3 hospital sales:
Large hospitals will ask for IHE profile conformance. Specifically:

IHE PDQm — Patient Demographics Query for Mobile
IHE MHD — Mobile access to Health Documents
IHE PIXm — Patient Identifier Cross-referencing for Mobile

These are exactly what New Loka is doing anyway. You're not building extra features — you're documenting and testing that your existing implementation conforms.
Not mandatory for T0/T1:
A single doctor using New Loka on their phone has no certification obligation whatsoever. They're not billing a national program, not connecting to a hospital network, not exchanging records with another institution.
The Practical Path
Phase 1 (T0/T1 launch):
  Build to FHIR R4 spec internally.
  No certification needed.
  Self-declare FHIR R4 conformance.

Phase 2 (T3 hospital sales):
  Publish a Capability Statement (FHIR resource that declares 
  exactly what your server supports — mandatory for any 
  FHIR server, free to produce).
  Run your implementation through the official 
  FHIR validator (free tool from HL7).
  Participate in an IHE Connectathon 
  (annual events, open registration, not expensive).

Phase 3 (India national integration):
  Register with NHA sandbox.
  Implement ABDM FHIR profiles.
  Complete NHA's integration testing process.
  This unlocks ABHA linkage — significant market differentiator.
The Capability Statement is worth understanding — it's a FHIR resource your server exposes at [base]/metadata that declares every resource type you support, every operation, every search parameter. It's how other systems know what they can ask of you. You generate it once and keep it updated.

FHIR in the Single Doctor Setup
This is a genuinely interesting design problem. The naive answer — "just run a lightweight FHIR server on the phone" — is wrong. Here's why, and what to do instead.
The Problem With a Phone-Based FHIR Server
A real FHIR server (HAPI FHIR, Medplum) is a Java or Node application with a relational database backend. Running that on a phone means:

200–400MB RAM consumed constantly
Battery drain from a persistent HTTP server
Android and iOS actively kill background servers
Completely unnecessary for a single user with no external queries

A single doctor is not exchanging FHIR resources with anyone. There is no interoperability requirement at T0 — yet.
The Right Mental Model: FHIR as Internal Schema, Not Protocol
At T0, FHIR is your data model, not your transport protocol. The distinction is critical:
What FHIR gives you at T0:
  ✓ A well-defined, clinically validated schema for every 
    data type you'll ever store
  ✓ Coded terminologies (SNOMED, LOINC, ICD-10) baked in
  ✓ A path to interoperability the moment the doctor 
    wants to share a record or move to a bigger system
  ✓ Regulatory defensibility ("we use the international 
    standard for health data")

What FHIR does NOT require at T0:
  ✗ A running HTTP server
  ✗ REST API endpoints
  ✗ Any network at all
  ✗ Certification of any kind
How It Actually Works at T0
FHIR resources live as serialized JSON objects 
inside CR-SQLite, encrypted with PRK.

cr-sqlite schema (simplified):

  TABLE fhir_resources (
    id          TEXT PRIMARY KEY,  -- "Patient/pat-7f3a9c"
    resource_type TEXT,             -- "Patient"
    content     BLOB,               -- AES-GCM encrypted JSON
    vector_clock TEXT,              -- CRDT metadata
    created_at  INTEGER,
    modified_at INTEGER
  )

The Rust core speaks FHIR internally.
The Flutter UI speaks to the Rust core.
No HTTP. No server. No ports open.

When Dr. Kulkarni enters a patient's vitals:
  UI → Rust Core → FHIR Observation JSON 
  → encrypted → stored in SQLite
  Nothing else happens.
What the Single Doctor Actually Gets
The value proposition at T0 has nothing to do with interoperability and everything to do with:
Replacing the paper register / WhatsApp note:

Structured patient list, searchable
Timeline of every visit, every prescription, every lab
Voice dictation → structured note in seconds
Photo of a handwritten referral → parsed into the record
Drug interaction checking against their own prescription history

The "beat a phone call" test at T0:
A solo doctor wants to know what they prescribed a patient six months ago. Currently: scroll through WhatsApp, search a paper register, or call the patient. In New Loka: patient name → search → medication history → 3 seconds.
When Interoperability Wakes Up
The FHIR-as-internal-schema choice pays off the moment the doctor needs to do any of these:
Share a referral letter:
Dr. Kulkarni refers a patient to a cardiologist.
  
  New Loka generates FHIR Bundle (referral type):
    Patient + Condition + Medications + relevant Observations
  
  Export options:
    → PDF (rendered from FHIR, human-readable)
      for doctors who don't use New Loka
    → QR code containing encrypted FHIR Bundle
      for doctors who do use New Loka
      (receiving doctor scans → imports directly into their T0 instance)
    → ABHA-linked share (if both parties have ABHA IDs)
      → NHA-compliant FHIR exchange
  
  The cardiologist never needs to know FHIR exists.
  The data is structured underneath.
Patient moves to a hospital:
Patient is admitted to a T3 hospital.
Dr. Kulkarni shares their record.

  New Loka exports: FHIR Bundle (complete patient history)
  Hospital's EMR imports it natively (if FHIR R4 compliant)
  Or: New Loka's own hospital instance ingests it directly
  
  No re-entry of patient history.
  No "please bring all your old prescriptions."
  Complete, structured, coded record arrives.
The doctor joins a small clinic (T0 → T1 migration):
Dr. Kulkarni joins a 3-doctor clinic with a shared server.

  New Loka detects the clinic's hub node via mDNS.
  Trust ceremony: clinic admin approves Kulkarni's node.
  
  Kulkarni's local CR-SQLite syncs to the hub.
  FHIR resources that were local-only now have 
  department_id and visibility assigned.
  
  The doctor's 2 years of local records become 
  the clinic's records — with attribution preserved.
  No migration tool. No export/import. 
  The CRDT merge handles it.
The Offline AI Value at T0
This is where T0 actually becomes compelling over paper even without any interoperability:
Scenario: Patient brings a stack of old lab reports.

Doctor photographs each page.
  → Image → TrOCR (on device) → raw text
  → Phi-3-mini → structured FHIR Observations
  → Trend graph appears: "Creatinine over 18 months"

Scenario: Patient describes symptoms verbally while
          doctor types something else.

  Doctor taps record:
  → Whisper.cpp transcribes in real time
  → LLM extracts: chief complaint, duration, associated symptoms
  → Populates HPI automatically
  → Doctor reviews, confirms in 10 seconds

Scenario: Doctor wants to prescribe amoxicillin.
          Patient is on methotrexate.

  Drug interaction check runs locally:
  → OpenFDA interaction database (downloaded, offline)
  → Flag: "Amoxicillin + Methotrexate: increased 
           methotrexate toxicity risk"
  → This happens on device, no internet, no latency
Summary: FHIR Across Tiers
TierFHIR RoleServer?Certification?T0 (single doctor)Internal data schema onlyNoNoT1 (small clinic)Schema + local sync formatLightweight FHIR store on hubNoT2 (rural hospital)Schema + internal APIHAPI FHIR on local serverVoluntaryT3 (hospital)Full REST API, external integrationsHAPI FHIR, clusteredIHE conformance expectedT4 (ABHA integration)National exchangeHAPI FHIR + ABDM profilesNHA certification required
The elegance of the architecture is that the doctor at T0 and the hospital at T3 are writing the same FHIR resources to the same data model. The only thing that changes as you move up the tiers is who can query those resources and how. The data itself never needs to be restructured or migrated.